---
layout: post
title:  "Adventures in Escaping Big Tech Dependency"
date:   2026-07-01 12:40:36 +0200
categories: LLM
---
Writing this now immediately after the [Claude Science Beta](https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-science-ai-workbench) has just been launched makes this seem particularly futile but we must trudge onwards.

I'm going to summarise what I've done this morning in two simple steps. This is an exercise both in writing and trying to get into the habit of making these short blog bosts.

I've FINALLY gotten around to getting a local LLM set up on my laptop. This took me way to long to do for how simple the process was, but perhaps after reading more, and working with claude code for a period now, I had a better sense of what I actually wanted out of this. Plus Pi has become available relatively recently which has cerntainly eased the process.

So what I have begun using, with the help of claude ironically to get things up and running, is [Ollama](https://ollama.com/) as my model server and model manager (correct term?) and [Pi](https://pi.dev/) as my agent harness, which is my replacement for claude codes TUI interface. 
I'm currently using[gpt-oss:20b](https://ollama.com/library/gpt-oss) after some failed experimenting with [qwen2.5-coder:14b](https://ollama.com/library/qwen2.5-coder), which doesn't seem to be able to produce the tool commands in the right format to work with a harness. 

Alright, let's go through this step by step:

## 1. Get Ollama

```bash
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
```
smack it in your terminal, simple as.

## 2. Get Pi

Used npm for this but curl seems to also work fine
```bash
npm install -g --ignore-scripts @earendil-works/pi-coding-agent
```

## 3. Get your model

Pick the model you like/think you can run based on your specs. 

```bash
ollama pull gpt-oss:20b
```

## 4. `models.json`

Pi needs to be pointed to your Ollama server and specific models. Create a `models.json` at `~/.pi/agents/models.json` which should look somehting like:

```json
{
  "providers": {
    "ollama": {
      "baseUrl": "http://localhost:11434/v1",
      "api": "openai-completions",
      "apiKey": "ollama",
      "compat": {
        "supportsDeveloperRole": false,
        "supportsReasoningEffort": false
      },
      "models": [
        {
          "id": "qwen2.5-coder:14b",
          "name": "Qwen2.5-Coder 14B (local)",
          "contextWindow": 32768,
          "maxTokens": 8192
        },
        {
          "id": "gpt-oss:20b",
          "name": "gpt-oss 20B (local)",
          "reasoning": true,
          "contextWindow": 32768,
          "maxTokens": 32768,
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The entries in models should obviously match whatever models you've pulled in the previous step. while You may need to edit the contextWindow and maxTokens settings based on your specfications. Claude seems to have given me reasonable defaults.

## 5. Environment variables

Default Ollama environment variables need to be updated to prevent the context length being limited also. Run the following command

```bash
sudo systemctl edit ollam
```

and make the following addition

```bash
[Service]
Environment="OLLAMA_CONTEXT_LENGTH=32768"
```

## 6. Get to work

Navigate to whatever project you want to work on and activate your tui with `Pi`, selecting available models with the `/model` command.

Enjoy!

